{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf2512
\cocoatextscaling0\cocoaplatform0{\fonttbl\f0\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
{\*\expandedcolortbl;;}
\paperw11900\paperh16840\margl1440\margr1440\vieww16280\viewh14340\viewkind0
\pard\tx566\tx1133\tx1700\tx2267\tx2834\tx3401\tx3968\tx4535\tx5102\tx5669\tx6236\tx6803\tx15094\li961\fi21\ri-6093\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs34 \cf0 Until the 1950s, investing relied solely on the expertise of portfolio managers. Afterwards, portfolio management was contaminated with ideas from economics, which at that time was already based on a rigorous mathematical formulation, stemming from statistics and probability. This led to the birth of portfolio theory \\cite\{Markowitz\} 1952. Today, the amount of assets managed by funds and private investors is currently more than 85 trillion USD, a quantity comparable to the global GDP.\
Classical investment techniques for portfolio management assign a statistical distribution to the returns of the assets. Then, once the statistical model has been chosen, the problem is solved by optimizing the expected value of the utility of some random variable (usually accounting for the trade-off between risk and return) that describes the value of the portfolio in some fixed time point in the future. This line of thinking has been proposed and sustained by Markowitz, Samuelson and Fama [Markowitz, 1952], and it is now called Modern Portfolio Theory\
(MPT).\
This is the standard approach both in academia and in practice, but it is known to be very susceptible to errors in the modeling of the random variables which represent the asset returns. Indeed, markets have a non-stationary behavior, which means that any statistical assumption is ephemeral and unreliable [Schmitt et al., 2013]. These techniques are also referred to as backward looking, i.e., they optimize w.r.t. inferences made on past realizations. In the complex financial environment of the past decades (and of present times) we saw how unpredictable certain events can be, and how any statistical assumption can be out-turned overnight.\
In this thesis, we present the orthogonal and less-known approach of Online Portfolio Optimization that originated from the fields of information theory at the Bell Labs in the 1950s, from the works of Shannon, Kelly and Cover. These methods were included in the classical portfolio theory framework, under the name of Capital Growth Theory [Hakansson et al., 1995], and became part of the machine learning literature under the framework of Online Learning [Cesa-Bianchi and Lugosi, 2006]. Only recently this field has been taken into the Online Optimization field too [Hazan et al., 2016]. This formulation of sequential decision making has interesting properties, such as stability in a game theory fashion (e.g., equilibrium) and robustness versus adversarial manipulation. This approach has been successfully applied to gambling and sports betting [Thorp, 1966], [Hausch et al., 1981]. The fascinating story of these works can be found in [Poundstone, 2010]. One of the most important points in favor of Online Learning are the strong theoretical guarantees provided by algorithms developed under this framework. These guarantees come from the game theory concept of Regret, which is a form of dissatisfaction originated from having taken an action, measured against the best actions taken by a class of adversaries, called Experts. The algorithms in this framework aspire to perform asymptotically as well as the best expert.\
Principal in this thesis will be the extension of the theoretical framework of these methodologies with the addition of transaction costs, while maintaining strong theoretical bounds. Indeed, in many financial models transaction costs are not considered and this can lead to over-optimistic findings. We think that research in this direction can eventually bridge the gap between practical applications and academic research in Online Portfolio Optimization.\
To tackle this problem we will propose the Online Gradient Descent algorithm for the Online Portfolio Optimization framework. Furthermore, we will show that it has theoretical guarantees on the wealth and on the transaction costs which it incurs during the investment period. Finally, we will present an experimental campaign to show that our proposed algorithm has good empirical performances on the wealth obtained in the absence of trading costs, and w.r.t. the transaction cost rate.\
\
1.1 Structure of the Thesis\
In Chapter 2 we present the framework of Online Learning, starting from Online Learning with Expert Advice. We then draw the connections with the Game Theory and present the Online Convex Optimization framework: the most suited to embed the problem of Online Portfolio Optimization.\
In Chapter 3 we introduce the problem of probability assignment and how this is a natural extension of the concept of Prediction with Experts advice presented in Chapter 2. From probability assignment we then pass to information theory, where the field of Online Portfolio Optimization was originally developed. The main reason of Chapter 2 and 3 is to introduce the theory necessary to understand the algorithms used in Online Portfolio Optimization.\
From Chapter 4 onwards, we concentrate solely on Online Portfolio Optimization. This chapter introduces the framework and novel concepts such as Total Regret. \
In Chapter 5 we present the state-of-the-art algorithms of Online Portfolio Optimization and explain their connections to the theoretical framework presented in Chapter 2 and 3. \
Chapter 6 presents the research developed during the thesis, and starting from the celebrated Online Gradient Descent algorithm extends to Online Portfolio Optimization with Transaction Costs, with a strong theoretical analysis.\
In Chapter 7 we present the numerical results of the Online Portfolio Optimization with Transaction Costs problem, on a variety of different datsets. Finally, Chapter 8 summarizes the main contributions of this work, and details the possible future developments.\
\
}